Add BPF 101 README file (#30932)
gravitational/teleport: bpf/README.md

# BPF 101

If you're reading this, you were probably tasked with writing a BPF code.
This document will help you get started.

#### Before you start here are some useful links:

> https://docs.kernel.org/bpf/ - BPF documentation
> https://github.com/aquasecurity/libbpfgo - Go bindings for libbpf
> https://github.com/iovisor/bcc - BPF Compiler Collection (a lot of examples)
> https://github.com/cilium/cilium - BPF-based networking, security, and observability (more examples)
> https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/bpf-helpers.7.html - BPF helpers documentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://docs.kernel.org/bpf/ - BPF documentation
* https://github.com/aquasecurity/libbpfgo - Go bindings for libbpf
* https://github.com/iovisor/bcc - BPF Compiler Collection (a lot of examples)
* https://github.com/cilium/cilium - BPF-based networking, security, and observability (more examples)
* https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/bpf-helpers.7.html - BPF helpers documentation
```

Markdown joins the lines otherwise.

## Environment setup:

We support BPFs only on ARM64 and x86_64 architectures.

1. VM with Ubuntu 20.04+ (or any other Linux distro with the kernel 5.8+ - Docker doesn't work for many BPF features)

> 2. Install `clang` and `llvm` (required for compiling BPF code)

Reviewer: Does `llvm` needs to be explicitly installed, or is whatever clang pulls good enough?

Author: `clang` should be enough. I'll fix that.

3. Install `libbpf` (required for loading BPF code) - get the required version from our Docker file

You can also use our Dockerfile to build the environment:

```bash

> make -C build.assets release-centos7

Reviewer: Didn't you say "no Centos7"?

Author: BPF doesn't run on CentOS 7, as it shipped with kernel 3.10, but our release build uses CentOS 7, and that is the build that we the most take care of.
Build on CentOS 7, run on Ubuntu. I think that the easiest way to put it.

```

## BPF code structure

BPF code can be divided into two parts:

> 1. BPF program - the actual BPF code that will be loaded into the kernel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. BPF program - the actual BPF code that will be executed by the kernel
```

Disregard if not accurate.

Author: I think they are both correct. The program is first loaded and then executed, but I'd argue that loaded is more accurate. You load the program into the kernel, but the execution happens when there is an event that triggers it (you always load, execution technically may never happen).

2. User space code - the code that will load the BPF program into the kernel

BPF programs are located in `bpf` directory in our repository. They are C like programs with some limitations.
The most important limitation is that you can't use any system calls in BPF programs. You can use only BPF helpers.
The BPF programs are compiled using `clang` 10+, GCC is not supported. 

> User space code is located in `lib/bpf` directory. It's written in Go and uses `libbpfgo` library to load BPF programs into the kernel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User space code is located in `lib/bpf` directory. It's written in Go and uses the `aquasecurity/libbpfgo` library to load BPF programs into the kernel.
```

Just so it's super clear which one. Various other suggestions follow this one.

> `libbpfgo` is a Go wrapper around `libbpf` library. It's a low-level library that allows you to load BPF programs into the kernel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`aquasecurity/libbpfgo` is a Go wrapper around the `libbpf` library. It's a low-level library that allows you to load BPF programs into the kernel.
```

> Note: `libbpfgo` is not backward compatible and you need a matching version of `libbpf` library. For that reason
> `libbpfgo` is not using semantic versioning, but tags have the following format `v0.4.5-libbpf-1.0.1`. 
> The first part is the version of `libbpfgo` and the second part is the version of `libbpf` library. 
> Using the wrong version of `libbpfgo` will result in a runtime/compilation error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: `aquasecurity/libbpfgo` is not backwards compatible, you need to use the
exact `libbpf` version it requires. For that reason `aquasecurity/libbpfgo`
doesn't use semantic versioning, instead the tags have the format
`v0.4.5-libbpf-1.0.1`. The first part is the `aquasecurity/libbpfgo` version,
the second part is the `libbpf` version. Using the wrong version of `libbpf`
results in a runtime/compilation error.
```

Various minor changes, feel free to ignore.

### BPF license

BPF programs are compiled into ELF files. ELF files have a license field that is used to verify that the BPF program
is allowed to run in the kernel. The license field is set to `GPL` by default. Teleport uses `Dual BSD/GPL` which 
disables some BPF features (like logging). To enable all BPF features to set the license to `GPL` in the BPF program
and revert back before merging the code.

### Logging

BPF programs can log messages to the kernel log. To enable logging, you need to set the license to `GPL`. Then you
can use `bpf_printk` helper to log messages. The messages will be logged to the kernel log. You can get the messages

>  from `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace_pipe`. Here is the best explanation that I found so far https://nakryiko.com/posts/bpf-tips-printk/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace_pipe`. Here is the best explanation that I found so far https://nakryiko.com/posts/bpf-tips-printk/.
```

### Communication between BPF programs and user space

BPF programs can communicate with user space using maps. Maps are key-value stores that can be accessed from both
BPF programs and user space. BPF programs can only access maps using BPF helpers. User space can access maps using

> `libbpfgo` library. Maps are defined in BPF programs and can be referenced by name from user space code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`aquasecurity/libbpfgo` library. Maps are defined in BPF programs and can be referenced by name from user space code.
```

Example:

> BPF: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/bpf/enhancedrecording/command.bpf.c#L18
> User space: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/lib/bpf/common_linux.go#L40-L51

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* BPF: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/bpf/enhancedrecording/command.bpf.c#L18
* User space: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/lib/bpf/common_linux.go#L40-L51
```

Note: `aquasecurity/libbpfgo` is not backwards compatible, you need to use the
exact `libbpf` version it requires. For that reason `aquasecurity/libbpfgo`
doesn't use semantic versioning, instead the tags have the format
`v0.4.5-libbpf-1.0.1`. The first part is the `aquasecurity/libbpfgo` version,
the second part is the `libbpf` version. Using the wrong version of `libbpf`
results in a runtime/compilation error.

### libbpf installation

`aquasecurity/libbpfgo` requires `libbpf` to be installed on the system. The most up-to-date installation instructions can be found 
in our Docker file: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/build.assets/Dockerfile-centos7#L108-L131

Remember that the library must be installed in `/opt` directory not in `/usr/local` or `/usr`.

### BPF license

BPF programs are compiled into ELF files. ELF files have a license field that is used to verify that the BPF program
is allowed to run in the kernel. The license field is set to `GPL` by default. Teleport uses `Dual BSD/GPL` which 

> disables some BPF features (like logging). To enable all BPF features to set the license to `GPL` in the BPF program

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
disables some BPF features (like logging). To enable all BPF features set the license to `GPL` in the BPF program
```

BPF programs and user space. BPF programs can only access maps using BPF helpers. User space can access maps using
`aquasecurity/libbpfgo` library. Maps are defined in BPF programs and can be referenced by name from user space code.

Example:

* BPF: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/bpf/enhancedrecording/command.bpf.c#L18
* User space: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/lib/bpf/common_linux.go#L40-L51

## BPF in Teleport

Teleport uses BPF to implement enhanced session recording and restricted networking. Both features work only on Linux with
the kernel 5.8+. Enhanced session recording records all:
* exec family system calls
* open family system calls
* network connections

All events are recorded in the audit log. https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/guides/bpf-session-recording/

Restricted networking allows you to restrict network access for users.
It's implemented by using LSM hooks and BPF programs.
https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/guides/restricted-session/
On ubuntu systems LSM hooks are not enabled in some version.

> Here are the instructions on how to enable them https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/8089#issuecomment-924990678

Author: I'll add this to our official docs.

Example:

* BPF: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/bpf/enhancedrecording/command.bpf.c#L18
* User space: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/2fd8f75e38eebf5c6826ef594433e5165c3bfbe1/lib/bpf/common_linux.go#L40-L51

## BPF in Teleport

Teleport uses BPF to implement enhanced session recording and restricted networking. Both features work only on Linux with
the kernel 5.8+. Enhanced session recording records all:
* exec family system calls
* open family system calls
* network connections

> All events are recorded in the audit log. https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/guides/bpf-session-recording/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All events are recorded in the audit log. See https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/guides/bpf-session-recording/.
```

Restricted networking allows you to restrict network access for users.

> It's implemented by using LSM hooks and BPF programs.
> https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/guides/restricted-session/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's implemented by using LSM hooks and BPF programs (
see https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/guides/restricted-session/).
```

> On ubuntu systems LSM hooks are not enabled in some version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On ubuntu systems LSM hooks are not enabled in some versions.
```

I think?

Could we be more specific? (Fine if not.)

Author: I think this is deterministic (each version that I personally checked had this disabled), but I think that would be a bold move to claim that LSM are always disabled based on that limited test.

> Here are the instructions on how to enable them https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/8089#issuecomment-924990678

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the instructions on how to enable them https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/8089#issuecomment-924990678.
```
